###The Role of Population in Economic Growth

####Introduction


The relationship between population growth and growth of economic output has been studied extensively (Heady & Hodge, 2009). Many analysts believe that economic growth in high-income countries is likely to be relatively slow in coming years in part because population growth in these countries is predicted to slow considerably (Baker, Delong, & Krugman, 2005). Others argue that population growth has been and will continue to be problematic as more people inevitably use more of the finite resources available on earth, thereby reducing long-term potential growth (Linden, 2017). Population growth affects many phenomena such as the age structure of a country’s population, international migration, economic inequality, and the size of a country’s work force. These factors both affect and are affected by overall economic growth. The purpose of this article is to use long-term historical data and a review of both theoretical and empirical work on the relationship among growth of population, total output and per capita output to assess the implications of their evolution for economic inequality, international migration policies, and general economic growth.

###Statistical Evidence on the Growth of Population, Per Capita Output, and GDP

Angus Maddison compiled an extraordinary set of data on population, per capita GDP, and GDP for virtually all countries in the world from 1 to 2008 of the Common Era (World Economics, 2016 and Maddison, 2001). After his death in 2010, researchers at the Groningen Growth and Development Center launched an initiative known as the “Maddison Project” which seeks to maintain, refine, and update Maddison’s original data set (The Maddison Project, 2013). Clearly, there were no government agencies collecting data on the national accounts of countries that may not even have existed in year one of the Common Era, or in 1700 or 1820 for that matter. As a result, the estimates recorded in the data sets may be somewhat less reliable than would be the case for more recent statistics. They are, however, consistent with the historical record and calculated in a uniform manner making them reasonable estimates of long-term economic trends. The World Bank (2017) publishes an online database with a great many socioeconomic variables, including population and real GDP, from 1960 to the present for most countries and world regions. Both statistical sources are used in computing the estimated growth rates reported in this article. Data on productivity are from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2016) and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD; 2016, 2017). Population and migration projections are from the U.S. Census Bureau (2017). Average annual compound growth rates are calculated using the formula: V = Aert where V is the final value, A the initial value, r the rate of growth, t the number of years, and e is the exponential. For example, total world population in 1960 was 3.04 billion rising to 7.35 billion in 2015, a period of 55 years. Setting A at 3.04 billion, V at 7.35 billion, and t at 55 and solving the formula for r gives an estimate of average annual compound population growth over this period of 1.61%. All the GDP estimates reported in this study have been adjusted to remove the effects of inflation. Data collected by Maddison (World Economics, 2016) are in 1990 U.S. dollars while those of the World Bank (2017) are in 2010 U.S. dollars.

###The Relationship Between Economic Growth and Population Growth

There appears to be some agreement in the literature that population growth and growth in per capita output are not independent and the most likely nature of the relationship between them seems to be that it depends very much on the particular circumstances, notably the age structure of the population, in the various countries and regions. The aging population in countries like Japan means that a relatively smaller cohort of working age people will be called upon to support growing numbers of retirees slowing economic growth unless there is a substantial rise in productivity and per capita output. A different type of dependency problem exists in many African countries where relatively small working-age populations are required to support the very large number of children who have important educational and health needs. In the future, these children will enter the labor force and economic growth should increase. Trajectories of population growth do not tend to include large and dramatic turning points so it is unlikely that the population trends in various parts of the world can be significantly altered in the short run by policy changes. As a result, the effect of population growth on per capita economic growth will probably remain highly country specific although population policies may have some longer-term effects on population growth and age structure.


###Conclusion

Given the likely evolution of the global population and the fairly low expectations that many have for per capita growth in output, Piketty’s worry that the rate of return to capital will be higher than the economic growth rate leading to increasing concentration of wealth and greater inequality seems warranted. This problem would be less severe if the rate of return to capital were to decline to levels below the current 3% to 4% suggested by Piketty. One would expect this return to decline as greater amounts of capital are amassed which may account in part for Piketty’s estimate that current returns are lower than those of the 19th and early 20th century. Baker et al. (2005) argue that returns to capital are related to the state of the economy so that low economic growth will lead to lower returns to capital. If this is correct, the problem posed by Piketty’s inequality may be at least partially self-correcting. In any case, economic growth will remain important in the 21st century for at least two reasons. First, if Piketty’s analysis is correct, slow economic growth may continue to be a factor in rising inequalities in the distribution of income and wealth. Second, economic growth in low-income countries is crucial for raising living standards and reducing global disparities between the more prosperous industrialized countries and those in which poverty and low standards of living are still rife (Milanovic, 2016). Because population growth plays an important role in overall economic growth, the evolution of world population will continue to be a major global concern.
